----

# THIS FILE WAS GENERATED AUTOMATICALLY.
# CHANGES MADE HERE WILL BE OVERWRITTEN.

template: pages/news-item.html.njk
title: An update on JSConf EU
filename: /an-update/index.html
date: 2020-01-01T00:00:00.000Z
nobuy: true
data:
  published: true
  reviewed: true
  id: 1WntDVF5i4B_9sqmVMaPOTRHRnd2OI-qsfcKY6aQP1P8
  name: An update on JSConf EU
  image:
    filename: image-2fcb3382.jpg
    filename_500: image-2fcb3382-500.jpg
    filename_1000: image-2fcb3382-1000.jpg
    filename_square_1000: image-2fcb3382-1000-square.jpg
    filename_square_500: image-2fcb3382-500-square.jpg
    filename_square_200: image-2fcb3382-200-square.jpg
    width: 1920
    height: 1280
    originalType: jpg
yt: {}

----


**Tl;dr: JSConf EU 2019, our 10th anniversary, will be the last edition of the
event in its current form. We will not return in 2020. And [neither will our
sister conference CSSconf EU](https://2019.cssconf.eu/last-of-type/). We still
love organizing community events, but we’ll take a break to consider what’s
next.**

## Escape velocity

In 2009 Holger, Jan, and Malte met at the inaugural JSConf US and spontaneously
decided to bring the event to Europe. It is difficult to remember or imagine
how different the JavaScript community was at the time. People were PHP, Python
or Java programmers and identified with those communities while doing a bit of
JavaScript on the side. The JavaScript community wasn’t a thing yet. That looks
different today, where even mid-sized cities often draw 100+ folks to regular
JavaScript meetups. We’re incredibly proud of having played a little role in
that.

## Impact

From our first event, JSConf EU 2009, where [Node.js was introduced to the
world](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EeYvFl7li9E), over the [launch of
TypeScript](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3UTIcQYQ8Rw), the [re-introduction
of React](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x7cQ3mrcKaY), and, finally, the
[launch of deno](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M3BM9TB-8yA) last year at
JSConf EU 2018, we feel confident to say that JSConf EU has had a bit of an
impact on both client-side and server-side computing over the last 10 years–all
the while somehow retaining the community focus and intense feeling of unity
that we first experienced in 2009. 

In addition to providing a space for a nascent community to find itself, we’ve
also worked hard on making sure this community development is sustainable.
Since 2012, we’ve began concentrated efforts to make our events more inclusive
and diverse, [starting with our speaker
line-up](https://2012.jsconf.eu/2012/09/17/beating-the-odds-how-we-got-25-percent-women-speakers.html).
We were also one of the first events to display and enforce a [code of
conduct](https://2012.jsconf.eu/code-of-conduct.html) at a time, when that
wasn’t the norm. From the PyCon family of events, we borrowed the idea of
offering on-site child care. [In 2014 we
began](https://2014.jsconf.eu/news/2014/09/02/accepting-applications.html) what
is now one of the [largest scholarship
programmes](https://2018.jsconf.eu/news/scholarships-awarded/) in
not-for-profit tech conferences. In 2019, we’re [improving
Accessibility](https://2019.jsconf.eu/accessibility/)  introducing for the
first time ever, [an exclusive space for BIPoCiT
folks](https://2019.jsconf.eu/bipocit-space/), supporting folks who [observe
Ramadan](https://2019.jsconf.eu/ramadan/), adding an [art exhibition
celebrating pioneers in
computing](https://2019.jsconf.eu/news/a-computer-of-one-s-own/). Some of these
things, we’ve pioneered, some of them we got inspired to copy from other great
events.

We are taking the technical and social impact of our events very seriously and
we are pleased that any and all of our initiatives from previous years have
been adopted by numerous events inside and outside of the JSConf/CSSconf family
of events, some even have been adopted as de-facto industry standards. We are
confident that we are only adding to this with our 2019 initiatives.

## Growth

After keeping the event size under 500 attendees for the first 7 years we
decided that it was time to grow in line with the size of the community. We
moved to a much bigger venue gearing up towards 1600 people for this year’s
events. And to be honest, we reached the limit of what can be responsibly
handled by our volunteer team. The small community gathering we set out for has
evolved into a 3 day event weekend with over 1600 attendees in total, 60+
flights and 100+ hotel stays to book, 120 scholarships to cover and a dozen
visas to organize. The cost of all this exceeds one million Euro (more on this
in our [finance
report](https://2019.jsconf.eu/news/the-jsconf-cssconf-eu-finances/)). Our very
time-consuming and incredibly rewarding hobby of organizing an event has
evolved into an all-year full-time job.

## Taking a break

Meanwhile, the JSConf community has grown past the original events – JSConf US
in the United States and JSConf EU in Germany. It achieved global reach with
events happening in [Hungary, Uruguay, Iceland, Asia, Colombia, Brasil,
Argentina, Australia, Hawaii, Korea](https://jsconf.com/), and more JSConfs in
the pipeline elsewhere in the world, as well as countless events that don’t
share the JSConf name but the same community spirit. All that together makes us
feel comfortable in taking a step back from organizing events and taking a
break. We formally announce that JSConf EU 2019 will be the last JSConf EU in
its current form.

We are going to take the time to reflect on our path from 2009/2013 until
today. When we started we saw a clear need for a JavaScript- and subsequently a
CSS-focused conference, with a strong vision for a community centered event,
that broke with many traditions of existing tech conferences. We ended up with
an event that is a cornerstone of our industry. Good ideas tested at JSConf and
CSSconf EU have been often copied, adapted and rippled through the entire
community. In particular, we feel that the current form is the maximum kind of
event we can do with our volunteer team structure. We will use the time to
analyze what events need to look like in ten years’ time, events that can be
organised sustainably. And we’ll start laying the groundwork for this after we
take a break.

We want to thank all the attendees, speakers, artists, sponsors, and volunteers
for putting your work, support, and trust in us over the years–and we hope to
see many of you in just under a month in Berlin for our final edition!

*[Feli](https://twitter.com/kotzendekrabbe),
[Simone](https://twitter.com/haas_simone), [Jan](https://twitter.com/janl),
[Holger](https://twitter.com/hblank), and
[Malte](https://twitter.com/cramforce)*

![The 2018 JSConf EU family
photo](contents:images/cms/image-2fcb3382-1000.jpg)


