----

# THIS FILE WAS GENERATED AUTOMATICALLY.
# CHANGES MADE HERE WILL BE OVERWRITTEN.

template: pages/news-item.html.njk
title: Meet the team!
filename: /meet-the-team/index.html
date: 2019-05-16T00:00:00.000Z
nobuy: true
data:
  published: true
  reviewed: true
  id: 1S9QMSgEfDXBhXrP5-ifqkNOVqcj3UTvmJFe9TzQD7pE
  name: Meet the team
  image:
    filename: meet-the-team-6d63e9c5.jpg
    filename_500: meet-the-team-6d63e9c5-500.jpg
    filename_1000: meet-the-team-6d63e9c5-1000.jpg
    filename_square_1000: meet-the-team-6d63e9c5-1000-square.jpg
    filename_square_500: meet-the-team-6d63e9c5-500-square.jpg
    filename_square_200: meet-the-team-6d63e9c5-200-square.jpg
    width: 1468
    height: 979
    originalType: jpg
yt: {}

----


As the conferences are less than 3 weeks away, our entire team is hard at work
and filled with anticipation for what’s to come soon. A lot of their work often
goes unnoticed — especially when the end product is of such overwhelming size,
it’s easy to forget the thousands of collective hours that were poured into
creating the conferences that you’ll see by the end of the month.

In this post, we’ll highlight some team members and their work and inspiration,
in order to give you a better insight into what kind of work goes into creating
JSConf and CSSconf EU.

### Preface: What does “team” even mean?

As you may know, JSConf EU and CSSconf EU are organized by a
[team](https://2019.jsconf.eu/about/#team) [of](https://2019.cssconf.eu/team/)
volunteers. It’s this team which we’ll spotlight, consisting of 20 or so
people. Of course, this isn’t every person that works on the conference, we
would exclude all of the construction workers, event planners, caterers,
security staff, and everyone else who gets paid by us to keep the wheels
turning. Excluding them from being called “team” would be an insult to their
invaluable contributions to our conferences.

## Jan Lehnardt

_Jan is a curator for JSConf EU._

__How did you get into organizing JS/CSSconf?__

I helped start JSConf EU in 2009 with Holger and Malte after attending JSConf
US the same year. We were jointly inspired to take what we experienced to
Europe, so more people could share in it.

__What is your favorite thing about organizing this conference/these
conferences?__

I love that we make a meaningful difference to our attendees’ lives and the
gratitude they show over all our hard work bringing people together.

## Malte Ubl

_Malte is a curator and the special effects person for JSConf EU._

__How did you get into organizing JS/CSSconf?__

I met Holger and Jan at the first ever JSConf US in 2009 and we decided to
bring the event to Europe.

__What is your favorite thing about organizing this conference/these
conferences?__

That you get to do it over again every year effectively from scratch, and get
just a little bit better every time. I wish software projects were like that.

## Olivia Hugger

_Olivia is responsible for conference social media and communications (and
she’s the author of this post)._

__How did you get into organizing JS/CSSconf?__

I was asked to help out with social media by Jan back in 2017, although I ended
up doing a bunch more stuff.

__What is your favorite thing about organizing this conference/these
conferences?__

It’s incredible (and very scary) to see the work we’ve been doing for months
evolve into something bigger than what any of us could ever fathom.

## Michele Guido

_Michele has organized the Community Lounge since the 2017 conferences._

__How did you get into organizing JS/CSSconf?__

In 2014, I was accepted to JSConf EU as a speaker and shortly after that became
an organizer for the monthly javascript meetup BerlinJS and did that for two
years. When the organizing team had the idea for a Community Lounge, Jan
reached out to me. How could I turn down a chance to be a part of the greatest
conference organizing team around???

__What is your favorite thing about organizing this conference/these
conferences?__

Getting to raise a platform for people doing amazing work in our communities
and seeing their joy and satisfaction when they’re on our humble Community
Lounge Stage gives me that bubbly feeling inside and makes all the effort
totally worth it for me. It’s even sweeter than it happens as part of a series
of conferences that are truly community-run, that really cares about all the
participants, that really makes an effort to do things right.

## Lauren Dorman

_Lauren is organizing the BIPoCiT (Black, Indigenous, and/or People of Color in
Tech) Space at JSConf EU and CSSconf EU._

__How did you get into organizing JS/CSSconf?__

I was first invited by the CSSconf Team to join the Talk Selection Committee to
assess talk proposals by reading, reviewing, and voting on 215 anonymized
submissions. I was later offered another opportunity to get more involved with
CSSconf and JSConf to help organize the BIPoCiT Space alongside Vanessa and
Dera.

__What is your favorite thing about organizing this conference/these
conferences?__

Working with a close-knit team of people who are caring and put a lot of
thought into the attendee experience. With the BIPoCiT Space, we are creating a
space that is very intentional and isn’t something typically seen at tech
conferences. The best part about organizing the space is having the opportunity
to create the best possible experience for Black, Indigenous, and/or People of
Color attending and providing a platform for speakers from diverse backgrounds
to share their knowledge.

## Kristina Schneider

_Kristina is an organizer of CSSconf EU._

__How did you get into organizing JS/CSSconf?__

When CSSconf US started in 2013 as one of the first and only events for CSS
developers, Nicole Sullivan and I thought that this needed to happen in Europe
as well. As I was already helping with JSConf EU in Berlin, I talked to them to
run the events together, and so we made it happen. 

__What is your favorite thing about organizing this conference/these
conferences?__

Seeing how many months of work finally result in three incredibly busy and
inspiring conference days – which enable many people to learn and connect!

## Simone Haas

_Simone is a curator of JSConf EU._

__How did you get into organizing JS/CSSconf?__

Kristina and Jan reached out to me in 2015 and asked me to handle the
communication with JSConf EU speakers and to take care of the scholarship
program.

__What is your favorite thing about organizing this conference/these
conferences?__

Working with the team is a great experience, I have learned a lot! Even if the
months before the conference are very stressful, I’m enjoying being at the
venue shortly before the conferences are starting, and then slowly seeing all
the people coming in. Being part of the event and talking with so many people,
who enjoy the conferences, is absolutely rewarding. 

## Holger Blank

_Holger is a JSConf EU curator and responsible for its sponsorships._

__How did you get into organizing JS/CSSconf?__

I went to JSConf US 2009. Back in Germany Malte, Jan and me started organizing
the first JSConf EU. In November 2009 it happened in Berlin.

__What is your favorite thing about organizing this conference/these
conferences?__

Co-shaping an international and diverse community platform is fun, also a
challenge and really rewarding. Also the team is just great!


## Felicitas Kugland

_Feli is a JSConf EU curator._

__How did you get into organizing JS/CSSconf?__

I just asked Holger if they need help with anything and since someone left the
team there was a spot left I could fill. 


__What is your favorite thing about organizing this conference/these
conferences?__

Giving back to the css & js community <3 
Bringing people together to share their knowledge and experience, to connect
them no matter where they come from or which level they have. That's really
heartwarming for me

